operator capability definitions (#2645)
operator-framework/operator-sdk: doc/operator-capabilities.md

> # Operator Capability Levels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Operator Capability Levels with OLM
```

Author: Operator Capability levels having no relationship to OLM. OLM is not aware of it.

> Operators come in different maturity levels in regards to their lifecycle management capabilities for the application or workload they deliver. The capability models aims to provide guidance in terminology to express what features users can expect from an operator.

Reviewer: These lifecycle management capabilities are related to the integration with OLM and the operator lifecycle on it I think we should make it clear.

Author: I disagree. Abilities to lifecycle the Operand across versions and perform advanced Operations on it as well as using Operand metrics to drive are in the domain of the Operator itself. They are not strongly related to the integration with OLM. They are there to inspire the author to think about the feature set of their Operator. The SDK does provide features to achieve these higher levels, e.g. scaffold metrics endpoints and (soon) webhooks.
I agree the SDK would be the place where to put more tools and helpers to achieve higher capability levels.

![operator-capability-level](./images/operator-capability-level.png)

Each capability level is associated with a certain set of management features the Operator offers around the managed workload. Operator that do not manage a workload and/or are delegating to off-clusters orchestration services would remain at Level 1. Capability levels are accumulating, i.e. Level 3 capabilities require all capabilities desired from Level 1 and 2.

## Terminology

**Operator** - the custom controller installed on a Kubernetes cluster

**Operand** - the managed workload provided by the Operator as a service

> **Custom Resource (CR)** - an instance of the `CustomResourceDefinition` the Operator ships that represents the Operand or an Operation on an Operand

Reviewer: WDYT about we add a link for k8s doc here?
See: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-kubernetes-api/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/

Author: Do you propose to use the word API instead of CRD?

Reviewer: No.

> **Custom Resource (CR)** - an instance of the [`CustomResourceDefinition`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-kubernetes-api/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/) the Operator ships that represents the Operand or an Operation on an Operand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Custom Resource Definition (CRD)** - an instance of the [`CustomResourceDefinition`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-kubernetes-api/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/) the Operator ships that represents the Operand or an Operation on an Operand
```

Reviewer: And Then ad the Custom Resource as well.

Author: This is incorrect. The text looks to educate the user about a `Custom Resource`, not a `Custom Resource Definition`.

**Managed resources** - the Kubernetes objects or off-cluster services the Operator uses to constitute an Operand

> 

Reviewer: Also, I'd add: 

Primary Resources and Second Resources.

Author: Can you provide details on what the difference is?

Reviewer: Primary Resources are the principal one reconcile by the controller. (CR from CRD)
The Secondary Resources are  the second one required for the Kind (CRD)

E.g (The CR of the controller is the Primary Resource and the Deployment, Service and etc are the secondary ones.  )
See: 
https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples/blob/master/go/memcached-operator/pkg/controller/memcached/memcached_controller.go#L46-L61

Reviewer: Just one nit the CR can be the second resource if it is not the CR of the operator/controller. I do not know how to clarifies it :-(

Author: I think this would classify as watched resources. Like with `Deployments` or `Namespaces`, also CRD owned by other Operators can be watched by an Operator without it being the primary owner. I think as this does not relate to any of the best practices outlined here, adding it would only create confusion.

---

> ## Level 1 - Basic Install

Reviewer: I think it is relevant to  OLM a not SDK.

Author: The capabilities levels have no relationship with OLM. It's about the the feature set and the lifecycle coverage of the Operator on its managed application. `Basic Install` here refers to the first lifecycle stage of the managed application, deployment.

- Operator waits for managed resources to reach a healthy state
- Operator conveys readiness of application or managed resources to the user leveraging the `status` block of the Custom Resource

**Example:** an Operator deploys a database by creating `Deployment`, `ServiceAccount`, `RoleBinding`, `ConfigMap`, `PersistentVolumeClaim` and `Secret` object, initializes an empty database schema and signals readiness of the database to accept queries.

**Configuration of the workload**

- Operator provides configuration via the `spec` section of the Custom Resource
- Operator reconciles configuration and updates to it with the status of the managed resources

**Example:** an Operator, managing a database, offers increasing the capacity of the database by resizing the underlying `PersistentVolumeClaim` based on changes the databases Custom Resource instance.

**Guiding questions to determine Operator reaching Level 1**

1. What installation configuration can be set in the CR?

2. What additional CR installation configuration could still be added?

3. Can you set operand configuration in the CR? If so, what configuration is supported for each operand?

> 

Reviewer: Should not all above be CRD and not CR?

Author: This looks at potential additions from the user perspective, so it would be CR. But I think the reader knows what this means when implemented.

4. Does the managed application / workload get updated in a non-disruptive fashion when the configuration of the CR is changed?

5. Does the status of the CR reflect that configuration changes are currently applied?

6. What additional operand configuration could still be added?

7. Do all of the instantiated CRs include a status block? If so, does it provide enough insight to the user about the application state?

8. Do all of your CRs have documentation listing valid values and mandatory fields?

---

## Level 2 - Seamless Upgrades

The Operator offers the following features related to upgrades:

**Upgrade of the managed workload**

- Operand can be upgraded in the process of upgrading the Operator, or

> - Operand can be upgraded as part of changing the CR

Reviewer: is not better use API instead of CRD. 
Note that changes in the CR's might has no relation with the upgrade of the operator and or its APIs ( CRD's )

Author: I am not sure what the proposed action item here is. This section does not mention CRDs, nor does it create a relation between upgrade of the Operator and its CRDs. Is this something that people would infer?

Reviewer: When we change/update a CR we are not doing an upgrade of the operator.

Author: Yes, and the cited section talks about the upgrade of the `Operand` as part of changing/updating a CR.

- Operator understands how to upgrade older versions of the Operand, managed previously by an older version of the Operato

**Upgrade of the Operator**

- Operator can upgraded seamlessly and can either still manage older versions of the Operand or update them
- Operator conveys inability to manage an unsupported version of the Operand in the `status` section of the CR

**Example:** An Operator managing a database can update an existing database from a previous to a newer version without data loss. The Operator might do so as part of a configuration change or as part of an update of the Operator itself.

> 

Reviewer: I understand that we recommend users store the versions of the images that would be supported/use by the project in the Operator env vars, so an upgrade of its image would mean an upgrade of the Operator project. In this way, I think would be good add this info at least as a note here.

Author: Actually I think this deserves its own documentation in the SDK. Currently we do not tell people that they should not use inline references to images in their Operator source code but should rather inject this information via environment variables. The only reference is a [design proposal](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/blob/master/doc/contributors/design-proposals/related-images.md) in the OLM repo. 
I think a small note here will cause more confusion. Do you mind creating this doc?
